Pursuant to Executive Order 12866, Regulatory Planning and Review, NRCS conducted a cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA) of the CSP as formulated for the interim final rule.

This CEA describes how CSP financial assistance and technical assistance are made available to farmers and ranchers who agree to install and adopt additional conservation activities; and improve, maintain, and manage conservation activities in place in accordance with CSP's objectives. The CEA compares the impact of these activities in generating environmental benefits with program costs. Many of these improvements can produce beneficial impacts concerning onsite resource conditions (such as conserving soil) and significant offsite environmental benefits (such as cleaner water, improved air quality, and enhanced wildlife habitat).

The environmental outcomes expected to be generated by enhancement activities are based on extrapolations of the environmental outcomes that have been studied and associated with many traditional NRCS conservation practices. While the outcomes from many traditional conservation practices have been assessed, the impacts generated from these enhancements are not as well studied. In conducting economic analyses where benefits are not well understood or difficult to measure, but activity costs are available, the traditional benefit-cost analysis is generally replaced with a CEA, the approach used for both this assessment and the interim final rule.

In considering alternatives for implementing CSP, NRCS followed the legislative intent to establish a clear and transparent method to determine in an open and participatory process, potential participants' current and future levels of conservation stewardship in order to gauge their environmental impacts and compare them. Because CSP is voluntary, the program is not expected to impose any obligation or burden upon agricultural producers and nonindustrial private forestland (NIPF) owners who choose not to participate. [3] Congress authorized the enrollment of 12,769,000 acres for each fiscal year (FY) for the period beginning October 1, 2008, through September 30, 2017. For FY 2009 through FY 2012, CSP has been authorized 51,076,000 acres (4 years multiplied by a 12,769,000 acre program cap per year).

Total program costs for CSP are shown in Table 1. Full participation is assumed for each of the 4 years CSP is offered, and the duration of each contract is 5 years. Total costs include only costs to the government. [4] The information in Table 1 highlights the cumulative impacts of four ranking periods and 5-year contracts. Each sign-up creates a commitment of $229.842 million for 5 years. Participants in the initial ranking period receive payments through FY 2014; participants in the last ranking period receive payments through FY 2017. The largest outlays of program funds occur in FY 2013 and FY 2014 and then begin to taper off as contracts from the first and later ranking periods end.

Yearly cost1GDP price deflator2Yearly cost in constant dollars11Congress set a maximum acreage limit of 12,769,000 acres and a national average payment rate of $18 per acre.2USDA Agricultural Projections to 2019. Office of the Chief Economist, World Agricultural Outlook Board, U.S. Department of Agriculture. Prepared by the Interagency Agricultural Projections Committee. Long-term Projections Report OCE-2010-1, page 15.